---
layout: post
title: "Bayesians vs Frequentists, a worthwhile discussion?"
modified:
categories: blog
excerpt: 
tags: [bayes probability statistics]
image:
feature:
date: 2015-04-20
---

Last week in class, we started learning about Bayesian statistics. The more we talked about it, the more I found myself interested in the theory behind Bayesian thinking.

A quick look online points to an ongoing debate between so called "Bayesians" and "Frequentists". Here's a quick overview:

[An explanation using a simplified example](http://www.behind-the-enemy-lines.com/2008/01/are-you-bayesian-or-frequentist-or.html)

[A funny comic](https://xkcd.com/1132/)

My interpretation of the differences is that Frequentists make inferences based on generalized probabilities (frequencies over a large number of trials) versus Bayesians, who make inferences based on states of knowledge (which are defined and updated with new evidence). It might be better explained through an example:

We make the hypothesis that when flipping a coin, it is equally probable to flip a head or tails. A frequentist might say, after flipping a coin 1000 times and getting 505 (or similar number) heads, that their hypothesis that the coin is fair is true. 

On the other hand, a Bayesian may start off with the prior belief that the coin is fair, and update the new probability because of the results of the experiment.

**Probability vs Likelihood**

When examining these differences, I came to understand the difference between "probability" and "likelihood" as they are used in statistics. 

Probability can be defined as the theoretical chance of achieving a certain result given a model/assumption we have made about that system. P(observation l model)

On the other hand, likelihood is a statement that can be made about a system based on some observation we have made about that system. L(model l observation)

**Why should we care?**

The goal of applied statistics is to make inferences based on "reality". We should be able to have a framework for udpating our models based on new evidence (a Bayesian concept) as well as a structured protocol for testing the validity of our model (a Frequentist concept).

I think I'm just scratching the surface here, but it's an interesting discussion nonetheless.